Hey you, are you wasting your time on
social media again? Your brothers and
sisters in Islam net from Norway are
establishing a masid, a da center.
Establishing a masjid to convey the
message of Islam is one of the best
deeds a Muslim can do. There's a huge
need for it in Norway. You know this and
I know this. So that makes the reward
even greater. So give generously and
Allahawel will give you even more.
How are you guys doing? And welcome to
another episode of the MH podcast. And
I'm joined with a very special guest, a
person who's been online and um you know
making all kinds of social commentaries.
Actually had our back a few times which
we have to be grateful for and thank
Maria the Muslim mom. Uh am I saying it
right? Is it Maria or Maria? How do you
how do you pronounce your name? Yeah,
Maria is is Pakistani. Maria.
>> Maria. Okay.
>> Yeah. Mashallah. Yeah. Maria. Maria. I
mean, do you mind? But is it does it
does it matter or
>> not at all? I don't mean to at all.
Doesn't matter.
>> Doesn't matter.
>> Whatever you're comfortable with.
So I was going to say that like you know
recently we were talking about da in
general and one of the things that keeps
coming up is the need for female du
people like yourself doing a great job
an excellent uh job online doing the
kind of getting involved I would call it
in the in the discourse itself right
>> um how have you found that from your
experience how have you found basically
doing da what's the reception been like
for from women from men, from Muslims,
from non-Muslims.
>> I mean, firstly, like you said, I think
the need for non-compromising
traditional Muslim women to do da'a is
vital for future generations of sisters.
Right. Recently, we've heard a lot
online about how da is male-dominated
and prejuditial against Muslim women.
The term Da Boys was created by
Islamophobes. And sadly, it's been
adopted by Muslim feminist types. And we
see most as we saw most recently with
someone like drama between brother Ali
and his wife where they were targeted.
And I think that's why we need female
role models that are less influenced by
western values and more so by Islamic
values. The mothers of the believers who
were the wives of prophet Muhammad peace
be upon him. They were not only role
models for women. They were also dat.
And that's who sisters need to emulate
not western feminists. In this day and
age of so-called female empowerment,
there are close to, I think, you know,
zero decent female role models for
Muslim women to look up to compared to
the time of our beloved prophet. And
because of the modern online era that we
live in, I feel like Muslim women have
to participate in public da'a to combat
ideologies like liberalism, feminism
that are leading many sisters astray.
Unfortunately, men are just not
relatable to women like we are to each
other. And the same applies to men. they
prefer to hear from other men. So if we
ignore, you know, the problem of sisters
being misguided, I think it's a recipe
for disaster for future generations.
If a sister who is true a man explains
why certain rulings in Islam um that the
West may perceive as not being favorable
to women are fair, then it lands much
better than if a man was to say it. I
mean, I know, brother, I believe you
have two daughters. I have three,
mashallah. So the older our daughters
get, the more they're in need of solid
Islamic female role models, especially
if they're being raised in the West. So,
but then in saying that, I do think that
we need some sort of training facility
for sisters to prepare them to give da
appropriately to conduct themselves
properly and to protect themselves from
fitna that comes with, you know,
excessive attention and chasing
popularity online, which can corrupt
women even more so than men at times. I
have many women that come to me um and
that are can relate to me, can talk to
me about certain issues. I have women
that would rather speak to me than speak
to a man. Um so I think it's definitely
necessary especially in this day and
age.
>> Okay. No, that was a good answer. Very
comprehensive. I appreciate the detail
there. Like okay, I want more kind of
personal input from like your
experience.
>> Like you obviously probably get
messages, you probably have interactions
with people, personal interactions. I
don't know what um area you're based in.
You sound like in Scotland or something
like that if that's correct.
>> I get a lot for some reason. People
think I'm Irish.
>> Yeah. Yeah. That's not the Irish accent.
But yes, as I was saying, so for
example, like from your, you know, from
your experience, what has been your
reception? Have you looked at your
demographics, for example, on YouTube
and on other platforms? Have you What's
the male female disparity there?
>> It's actually split. I do get a lot of
men that watch just as much as women and
I think it's maybe because of the
content that I put out. At the very
beginning, my content was very much
about motherhood, about parenting and
then with everything that happened with
Israel and Palestine, geopolitical stuff
just naturally became part of um what I
started.
>> That's interesting. So do you know what
the numbers are? Do you have you looked
at that the
>> Not recently? No, I haven't looked at
the numbers recently.
>> Is it similar? Is it like 50?
>> It's very similar. Yeah, it's a very
50-50 split. Even at the beginning, a
lot of the stuff that we used to that I
used to talk about was very much
>> feminist stuff and promale stuff and
very much about absent fathers and
things like that, which a lot of women
again don't talk about online. So, I
think that yes, I do appeal to women
because I am a woman, but I do also talk
about very male
>> issues. Yeah.
>> From a woman's perspective. So, I think
that's why men can also relate, but then
women sometimes women do listen to that
as well. And I think that's also
important is having someone to talk
about male issues but being a woman
because women are going to listen to
women, right? Um
>> no, that's interesting like because as
you've I think you've you've said it
right and there are some women that will
listen to other men who have got more of
a compassionate approach as well. So for
for example like man I don't know if
you've probably heard of him right?
>> Yeah. He's he's very popular with the
female audience or and nomin
he's he's obviously popular with both
these guys are like popular with them
>> like because their approach is very much
um actually I would say properly
compassionate you know they are
compassionate and and that's why a lot
of people like them now it's been used
like poratively like you know stuff like
that but no honestly it's just sometimes
I I would I watch their kind of shows
and stuff with my my son or my daughter
this is the kind of thing I would watch
in like Ramadan, I'd watch. I wouldn't
watch a Muhammad hijab character. And
that's really the the truth of it is
that a lot of our way of kind of
speaking to people is quite assertive,
overly assertive, very combative, and
it's just really hard for someone like
me to shake it off. So, a person's got
to know their limitations. And and I
just came to the conclusion essentially
that if we want good role models as you
mentioned for our daughters and stuff
like that
don't seem as if they're prejudicial
towards women and they can't be because
they are women themselves then we do
need women in in in the field especially
now like Tik Tok has become a big thing
as you mentioned Ali was going back and
forth with a particular couple of Tik
Tockers and stuff like that and um you
know there's a lot of women now I feel
like that are on Tik Tok. Do you do you
think you know the reason why it seems
like a lot of Muslim women are spending
a lot of time on the short form content
on like Tik Tok on Instagram? That's my
um perception of it. Am I right to think
that or is was that not correct?
>> Yeah, I I would agree with that. Like
you know
I think if women are you're having
children, you're you're spending a lot
of time sitting feeding children, you
know, a lot of the time you're scrolling
on your phone. In the evening we find
men and women but yes more so women are
sitting and scrolling through Instagram,
scrolling through Tik Tok, making Tik
Tok videos about their life um wanting
to show the perfect life. Um and it is
unfortunately seeping into our um as
well and it's leading women astray
because they are following non-Muslim
women or Muslim women that are maybe not
as Islamically in inclined as other
Muslim women. So I think it depends who
they're following, what they're
following. There's a lot of, you know,
the verge online for Muslim women as
well right now. That seems to be a
massive thing. Beauty and how you look
and things like that. So yeah,
unfortunately it is taking over um
everything.
>> So in addition to like having role
models that are females, what would you
say is the solution to this kind of
problem? Cuz it seems to be a particular
problem especially for younger women,
Muslim women in the west. So how what
would you say the solution is for that
aside from the role models?
>> How to stop um them being corrupted? Is
that what you mean? or
>> no I mean like whether it's just like as
maybe providing a counterbalance or or a
program or how would how do you
counterbalance this this current of now
females looking to the algorithm on
Instagram or looking to the algorithm on
uh Tik Tok in order to find some kind of
inspiration and then that leading them
to feminist directions or becoming
feminist orientated. If I'm honest, it
starts with parents. If it starts, it
starts in the family home. Obviously, if
we're talking about young children, even
children, even teenagers, right? So, if
your teenager is has got a phone and is
looking at stuff online already, then
unfortunately, you have maybe failed as
a parent. They shouldn't have a phone.
You should be monitoring what they're
looking at. They should have Islamic
values from their home. Of course, you
know, you go to mainstream schools.
Again, that's something that we can
combat. You can go to Islamic schools.
You can homeschool your children. It's
all about what's happening in the family
home. What are you teaching your
children? What are you putting into your
children? What path are you leading them
down? If you're leading them down a good
path, then they're going to follow that
path. If you're not leading them at all,
or if you yourself are not following the
right path, then they're going to follow
the wrong path as well. So, I think it
does start with the parents in the
family home. And if you're looking at
women that are older, um it
unfortunately it takes everybody a
certain time to want to turn and look a
different way. If if you're in your 30s
and you're looking at feminists online,
how do you change that? You you just
have to have more women that are
speaking about dawa, speaking about the
right things. You need to sort of um
combat the feminist stuff with the stuff
about Islam.
>> That's a good observation. So let me ask
you this then. Um what do you think some
of the main reasons psychological or
otherwise? You mentioned some of the
upbringing related kind of stuff but
what are some of the main psychological
reasons why a lot of Muslim women if
they don't identify uh openly with
feminism because a lot of them don't
want to identify openly with feminism
but will adopt a lot of the the values
of it knowingly or unknowingly
consciously or unconsciously. What do
you think some of the main psychological
reasons are for that?
>> For adopting feminism
>> or Yeah. or like fe feminist tendencies
or and incorporating it with like an
Islamic worldview or amalgamating it
with that. What do you think some of the
reasons are for that?
>> It's so interesting because I I actually
I don't know because I am not like that
at all. So I find it hard to understand
why a woman would honestly I I I do I do
struggle to um understand myself even
being a woman because I follow those
ideologies. I've never have even when I
wasn't fully you know when I wasn't
following Islam like I am now. Even then
I was never the feminist type. Um, so I
genuinely don't understand why a woman
thinks it could be money, it could be
attention, it could be following the the
herd. You know, we always we say we're
all sheep and you either follow the herd
or you don't. And it could be fear of
being
>> the one that's missing out or the one
that's not part of the in crowd. That's
that's what I see it as. And and to me,
and I hope people don't take offense,
but to me, all those things are quite
shallow. And I think if you want to put
yourself first and you are come away
from the crowd, you actually see that
they're all following the wrong thing
and that they're all leading each other
down a path that's not going to go
anywhere good. So I honestly don't
understand it myself because I've never
been one to follow on that path.
I mean um a lot of it now is I don't
know it's I might be looking at things
uh in a skewed manner being a man being
living living in London living like
seeing certain case studies speaking to
certain people but that's why I think
this is healthy for me to have this
conversation with you and for you to
give me your insight as well which is
that I get a sense that within the
subgroup of like Muslim women right
there is a um a feeling that doesn't
it's a it's a different kind of feeling
sometimes a psychological feeling of
fear of missing out or is kind of like
comparing themselves with the dominant
female population in the western world
and then maybe seeing the husband as an
obstacle to that and then growing
resentment to the husband as a result
>> and hence a lot of the time where you
see that you mentioned in the beginning
like all these uh cases of the Muslim
woman like holding
the children as a kind of a hostage or
something like that or not um
essentially giving the rights of the
father to the father and hurting the the
the child by so doing. We see that a lot
now um within Muslim women. So what is I
want to understand if I've understood it
correctly. Is there a feeling within
some not all of them of course but some
Muslim women that are more inclined to
feminism. Is there a feeling that
they're missing out in terms of compare
like compared to their non-Muslim
counterparts and does that then
translate to resentment towards the
Muslim husband which causes all kinds of
issues or do you think that's a bit of
an overanalysis?
>> Well, it's also who's shouting the
loudest, right? So, who's shouting the
loudest right now is mainstream media,
social media. What is the biggest thing?
So, that's what they're following.
That's what you're going to base. And
again, it comes down to how were they
parented? What was in their home growing
up? Um, we find that a lot of Muslim
women that do take the children away
from the fathers, how were they grown
up? Do they have a good relationship
with their own father? Do they
understand that that's an important
relationship to have? Why are they
damaging the children and thinking that
they're punishing the father when
they're actually punishing the children?
Um, and I do think psychologically
sometimes I think it's
>> it's shaitan, right? is a lot of it is
about lack of Islam in your in your
heart in your house. Um you don't
understand the religion properly. A lot
of Muslim women maybe don't even have
that resentment towards their husbands.
Maybe they actually have that resentment
towards a religion. And this is me being
honest. Right.
>> That's interesting. That's that's a deep
one. See, it's a good thing you're
saying it, not me. That's Yeah. Go on.
Tell me why you think that is then.
>> Well, if if I'm honest, right, in Islam
right now, what are women doing? They've
got their hijabs off, right? They're
wearing next to nothing. They're covered
in makeup. They're they're
they're not even getting married
properly now, right?
>> They're having relationships outside of
marriage first and then going to their
parents and going, "Listen, I've met
someone and this is I want to have a
relationship. This is how I want to get
married to."
>> Yeah. To be fair, men are doing a lot of
that stuff as well to create some
balance. And of course, you know.
>> Yes. Right. Okay. So, let's that that's
a good point. So, so both both genders
are doing that. And who are they
following? They're following the
non-Muslims. So, and a lot of the time
they're seeing Islam as restricting them
from doing those things. So, they will
pick and choose. Ramadan comes 30 days a
year, right? Let's put hijab on. Let's
pray. Let's do our fast. Ramadan
finishes, they go back to doing normal
what they're doing. I've seen many cases
like that, too. And yes, when they do
get married, if they have a h if they
get married to a husband that is
following Islam and that wants to bring
up the children a certain way and they
obviously are feeling like they're being
oppressed. Now, what's that one that um
people say that it says in the Quran,
you have to obey your husband and that
takes that that riles women up, but they
don't actually look in what's behind
that. What does a husband have to do for
his wife? What does a wife have to do
for their husband? What are the rights
and responsibilities? You actually have
to know these things before you can take
one line and just get mad and think
that. And the same for the husbands,
right? You can't shout at a woman and
say, "You have to obey me." If you're
telling her to do the wrong things, he
has to also be follow.
>> Sorry, I'm getting too heated now. I'm
talking too much.
>> This is This is Yeah, this is You can
say what you want. I mean, this is
completely safe space. You can say what
you like. People have had enough of
hearing what I have to say anyway. Even
the men have men and women. Everyone is
a we need to hear uh new people.
But as I mentioned,
>> what do you think? Can I ask you what
you think is a solution for helping
these types of women? What do you think?
What do you think from a man's point of
view?
>> I would have to say that there's a lot
of the responsibility that actually is
on the man. Um in fact probably the line
share of it because
a lot of the reason why uh women resort
to that kind of stuff is because um it's
it sounds cliche to say this but it's
because a man is not upholding his own
end of the things like you know uh Islam
has a very strict protocol on provision
and protection you know and but but back
in the days this is how I see it right
like back in the days a woman would
would have to respect
a a medieval man say for the sake of
argument because she sees him at least
participating in the training for a war
if he doesn't engage in the war himself
right
>> and knows that he can be called at any
time in a conscription format to have to
essentially put his life on the line for
the wife and the children in a way that
would never have to happen now in Pax
Americana where basically especially the
western Muslim man it doesn't have to
engage in any kind of physical
confrontation that would actually mean
uh that their life could be in danger. I
mean the prophet wasallam as an example
right he had you know he had 13 uh wars
that he participated in at the age of 50
something. I mean I consider this to be
a tremendous thing and people don't
realize how significant that is. once or
twice a year, you're putting your life
on the line. Like, so when you go back
to your to your wives or you your wife
as a man who does stuff like that, then
she has an automatic respect for you,
which now a man has to work harder in
order to obtain. So there's an there's a
historical element of this which I think
um we can't actually do anything about
because obviously the the war element
especially with the genocides and stuff
we don't have an outlet to go to war in
that in that strict sense that classical
sense but there are still things that
Muslim men have to do for for the Muslim
woman which they are failing to do. For
example, I I've heard many times a
community that, you know, a man is not
forcing the woman to work, but
essentially putting her in a position
where she has to contribute financially
to the household, right? Or that he's
giving her a double burden. So, on the
one hand, she's working and outside and
then she's coming home and she's
actually got kids that she's looking
after as well. All of this stuff
actually gives a woman a justifiable
Islamic right to feel resentment because
she's her her Islamic rights are being
infringed upon. And someone in that
position has, I think, a different case
to make than a woman, for example, who's
being influenced by a Tik Tocker, is
meant to be an educated woman, but she's
going on Tik Tok and she's listening to,
with all due respect, someone who's
probably uneducated or probably
unacredited and they're just listening
to them and they're feeling into their
emotional biases that are already there
and they have a weak conviction in their
faith and they don't actually believe in
Islam fully. And maybe if if you if you
had to give it as a percentage, they
believe in Islam as a matter of 50% or
45% or something like that or or 55%.
There's a difference between a woman
who's gone who's actually had her
Islamic rights being uh taken away from
her or whatever and she's now responding
in a psychological way. The
psychological way may be the same as the
second category of woman for the sake of
argument. But that second category of
woman is a spiritually more is a weaker
kind and is therefore a lesser type from
the Islamic perspective than the first
example that we've given. So there's I
think myriad reasons but a lot of it
does fall on on men. A lot of it does
and and we have to take responsibility
for that. And I look even even with the
whole da bros and da boys uh you know
thing. I think there is some truth in
that the criticisms actually you know
>> because and I've already said that
before especially like I can only speak
on my own kind of behalf by saying that
I think that to be fair a lot of the
culture wars and the gender wars that
have taken place with the red pill
movement all that kind of stuff we have
gotten involved in that you know and
sometimes in a detrimental way in in a
way that the tone is a little bit too
alienating to women and stuff so they
may feel as if people that are meant to
be religious spokespeople, yeah, are,
you know, like um alienating them with
their tone and their attitudes and stuff
like that. And a lot of that stuff is
legitimate. So, you know, there there's
a balance to be made, I think, in the
analysis. But in the final analysis, I
think that we need to um appreciate also
that there are very specific female
struggles that we need to have very
specific female um kind of oriented
answers for and that's why these
conversations are very useful to me.
>> Yeah, definitely. I agree. And I, if I'm
honest, I think if a woman is living
with a husband that is giving her all of
her rights and is fulfilling his rights,
I don't see her going down the wrong
path or looking on TikTok and following
the feminist path. Because you're right,
if a Muslim if a Muslim man is leading
his house the way that they should be
led, there shouldn't be issues in that
in that home. And as long as she knows
before they get married what her rights
are and what she's supposed to be doing,
then there shouldn't be issues. Um,
yeah. And I'll be honest, I mean, what
you were saying about the whole Dava bro
stuff is it's disheartening to see
Muslims publicly, you know, beefing and
and fighting online and we see that a
lot just now. And I think even
historically what you were saying, you
know, historically back in the day, they
would fight wars. If we were all united
as an um maybe we could fight and we
could, you know, combat everything just
now, but we're not united. We can't even
unite with each other online. You know,
I'm not going to mention names here
because I don't want to come across as
taking sides because I haven't to be
honest, I haven't followed everything so
extensively to the point where I would
know the full context of what's been
said. But personally, I think that these
types of things should be handled behind
the scenes. And there's since there's so
much hatred towards Islam and Muslims
online, I think we should be united,
especially in the stressful time that
we're in as an umah. If there are
disagreements where people feel that
certain statements have been made
publicly, then they should be corrected
publicly but respectfully. I think once
eagles get involved and we've seen many
issues right now, eagles get involved
starts getting personal. People start
taking shots at each other. It becomes
very messy. People are invading each
other's space. And of course, you know,
people are going to make mistakes and
maybe say things online that aren't
accurate, but why not correct yourself
or apologize rather than doubling down
on the inaccuracies. And I also feel we
get to a point sometimes where the back
and forth is so disrespectful and it
gets so out of hand that there's no way
back. And at that point, there should be
then be a mediator, maybe someone of a
higher authority that should step in,
get individuals on a call, maybe set up
a meeting to smooth things over. You
know, you could there's so many things
that we could do. I mean, my brother Ali
was having issues with the Muslim
sisters. I got in touch with the Muslim
sisters to have a discussion to smooth
things over.
>> Oh, really?
>> How did that go? How did that go?
>> I was met with silence. So, you know,
but you have to try your we all have to
try our part, but it's embarrassing.
We're embarrassing ourselves, right?
There's also major fitna right now like
you said with the gender war stuff and I
don't agree with it but it just it gives
the anti-Muslim crowd more ammunition
against us like they're just laughing at
us. You know, Muslim women who support
Muslim men and vice versa because
>> the people who want to divide us are not
on our side despite them pretending to
care about women's rights. It's it's
never too late to resolve things and
move on especially when you know people
have been friendly before. I'm sure you
can, you know, be friendly again, but
you know, may Allah guide all of us and
them um that are going through these
issues.
>> Well, I mean, what you're saying is very
Islamic and I think it's something that
we kind of gloss over a lot of the time
when we read the Quran or listen to it,
which is verses like
that hold together to the rope of Allah
and do not be divided. And um this is a
key verse because it includes
everything, right? It includes tribes,
it includes uh sects, it includes uh men
and women, it includes races, it
includes ethnicities. It's very clear to
me that Allah wants us as Muslims to
unite. There have been attempts by some
groups to try and undermine this verse
essentially and try to override it with
uh with interpretations which
essentially favor that u you know one it
has to be one understanding etc. etc.
which I don't think classical scholars
have believed in that while you know
Allah says in the Quran
that come together in come together in
piety and god consciousness you know or
goodness and god god consciousness and
do not come together in animosity and so
come together this is actually it's
clearly a generic statement it's come
together it even you could argue it
includes non-Muslims if there was an
issue to do with goodness that you can
come together with a non-Muslim on this
issue. So um the fact that men and women
have to now understand that the
differences among them are not as as uh
important or they should not be you know
emphasized as much as the similarities
between them. Okay, is something very
important. the in the beginning of the
genocide when when the Palestine thing
was going on
there was this incredible unity actually
there was the became awake for a little
bit but then it people started to get
tired of it and now they've gone back to
their kind of original position and the
gender wars has started to kind of you
know become a little bit more relevant
again um but I think it's we saw we we
all understood the need
is it working still
>> I can't see it
>> oh okay we all understood the need at
that time to um Maria can you hear me?
Yeah.
>> Yeah, I can hear you good.
>> Yeah, sorry the screen switched off
here. We all we all understood the need
at that time like in the very beginning
of the genocide like to unite and to put
our differences aside etc. But like now
because of the gender wars and the
culture wars and whatever that's come
it's become a bit more relevant again so
that people are going back to their
original position. So it's it's knowing
that okay actually when when push comes
to shove people don't actually care. the
westerners, the feminists don't actually
care that much about um something. Okay,
now it's it's gone. It's gone.
>> There's the setup is all like, you know,
there's a tacky setup here that needs to
be.
>> Is it too technical? Is that what the
problem is?
>> Yeah. See,
>> yeah. So, I was saying, you know, it's
um
so as I was saying, we understood the
need then and then we went back into
original positions. So we have to
realize that actually the feminists, the
western feminists and western liberals
etc. they don't actually care about you
as much as they think you do. Look,
think about it. All these men and women
and children were being killed and they
don't really care that much. And there
are some obviously in the left wing that
came on the protests and all that kind
of stuff, but by and large there wasn't
that kind of an outrage that we would
have expected when you consider the
situation at hand. So coming together is
a very important thing. Realizing that
okay, these are different divisions. I
was I don't know if you saw this. I was
shocked and appalled when I saw some of
the Somali landers come out and wave the
Israeli flag. It was one of the most
repugnant things I've ever seen in my
life.
>> I'm not saying all of them. Of course, a
lot of them. I know them personally.
They disavow the thing.
I mean, it shows I'm so surprised that
you've put your tribal identity above
and beyond, you know, the it's
>> Yeah. the tribal identity above and
beyond the Islamic identity. It's so
shocking when people put like it it's a
cringeworthy and embarrassing thing.
It's one of the most embarrassing and
humiliating things any Muslims have ever
done in the last 50 years. And someone
will say, "But you don't, you know, you
don't condemn the UAE and you don't
condemn the the Egyptians and the
governments and all these people." We're
not talking about governments here.
We're not. We are talking I have never
seen in in Egyptian history. Yeah. As a
person who's kind of follows the news in
Arab, never seen in Pakistani history
people in Islamabad
with an Israeli flag waving it around
for whatever reason. It's never
happened. This is a a very specific
tribal disease that that is more
pronounced in that area of the world
than probably any other area of the
world. And it's something the um has to
look at
>> because if if we try and deny the fact
that this uh some members of the ishak
tribe or the Somali land tribe have
betrayed the um they have betrayed the
um in that way and we say okay what
about this government that government?
There's no I've never seen people in a
Muslim majority country wave the Israeli
flag and do I've never seen it. the
labor. I've never seen it in my life.
Maybe someone can show me a couple of
things. But crowds of people in Hergas
are doing that and then some people
doing it here in Birmingham. It's a
shame and it's an embarrassment. And in
the same way that that's a shame and
embarrassment women who are Muslim or
men he even who are Muslim right and
they are you know born raised in the
west that they put like an ideology that
is the knowledge production of which is
a western white knowledge colonial
knowledge production they put that
identity the first accept that identity
and then they put it above Islam it
could be argued to be worse than what we
saw in Somali land it's even worse than
that because at least with that the
tribe tribe is is an African tribe with
this other thing is is you're taking the
colonial ideology and you're making that
your identity.
>> It's the embarrassment of all mother of
all embarrassments. And I'll be honest
with you, Maria,
>> I don't want to be ranting too much
because we want to hear more of your
voice. Um, as well obviously that's the
whole problem is that men are talking
too much here, you know, as but you know
like I developed a particular aversion
towards feminism
uh when I first got into the da. I got
into DA maybe 10 years ago, right? So I
was 24. I'm 34 now.
>> And I got into before that I started
doing like tours in the UK universities.
Yeah.
>> And when I did that, okay, I started to
realize really quickly that the main
shooad that people have a lot of them
are based on a feminist presupposition.
Okay. Even we have something in Sapians
called the lighthouse mentoring service.
I asked and it's a fantastic. It's like
a call center that deals with people
shar etc. And the person who's in charge
of it is called use of ponders. He's
does great work there.
>> I ask him of the the database that you
have and the information that you have.
What are the top
that exist in the in the world today and
from the conversation that you've had
three or five of them three of the five
were somehow related to feminism. Three
out of five. Yakim done something
recently as well about um doubts and
stuff like that and the moral aspects
and feministic and women's right it
always comes up. So my aversion to
feminism came as a result of the fact
that when I started going around to the
UK universities and I was doing da when
I was 15, 16, 17 in my school. So no one
could take the fact that I was doing da
away from me before there was any
cameras. I was doing it to my friends
and peers and I went to these
universities and was doing the same
thing as I was doing in my school. Yeah.
Telling people about Islam, trying to
convince them Islam. I realized that the
feministic interrogations were the one
of the main stumbling blocks between
people and guidance.
>> So I started to develop an aversion
towards feminism just in the same way as
for example if I had been um if I'd been
born and raised in the communists I
don't know Ukraine or something like
that. Yeah. In the 80s and I tried to
give da in Ukraine as a Muslim and then
everyone was like all these Muslims were
being influenced by communism. I would
develop a similar aversion
>> towards communism. But it's just that in
the west feminism become that thing. So
for the gripe I have with this ideology.
I only have one gripe as essentially
someone who's trying to do missionary
work. My gripe is that it constitutes
one of the main stumbling blocks, one of
the main barriers to entry between a
person and their Islam. Mhm.
>> The femin if you take and adopt
feministic presuppositions and then try
and approach Islam, you will end up
either contradicting yourself, being
unfaithful to it, or you're going to end
up not believing in Islam. You're going
to pretend Muslim, but you're not going
to end up belie That's why I believe
it's such a problem. And as I say,
that's why there's it's not just that
women need to get involved in the
da'wah. I believe that they need to deal
with this very specific problem if they
if they care about the guidance of men
and women. Okay? Because when women give
dawa online, they're not just giving da
to women. They're actually giving da to
men as well. And frankly, sometimes men
need to hear it from women, just like
sometimes women need to hear it from
men. It's sometimes it's refreshing and
empowering for a Muslim man to hear,
"Oh, look, here you got a Muslim woman
speaking about this thing. She's proud
of the identity. She's like modeling it
for us." Like it's empowering. It can it
can boost the iman of a man as well who
who also could be affected by feminism.
I mean, feminism is not just something
that affects Muslim women. I mean, it
affects
>> Yeah. genuinely. So, like that's why I
feel like it's an issue and and you're
right to mention about the um about some
of the ego issues, but we can maybe
discuss that. Uh if you have time, we we
can discuss that.
>> I wanted to get your your response to
what I've just said. What do you think
of what I've just said there?
>> I mean, 10 years ago, feminism in
general was was massive, right? It's big
now, but it was massive then. And I
think that's when it really kicked off,
maybe even before that as well. So, it
was a massive thing. And I think that
the reason why it's a building, it's a a
block between women and their Islam is
because they don't understand Islam.
Again, it's coming back to what I was
saying earlier, right? If you've not
read the Quran properly, if you've not
if you don't understand what it means,
if you've not done the research, if
you've not spoken to the right people
and you're just getting lines out from
the Quran, of course you're going to
say, "That's against women. That's
against women." You know these things
about like inheritance and polygyny,
right? That's like a massive one that
people always say, "You can have four
wives, but we can't have." And it's
like, well, why do you want to have four
husbands, right? Why do you want to have
that?
>> And even if you don't want to have that,
look at why men have to men have had
that ruling. Why is that allowed? Can a
man actually do that? Especially in this
day and age, can they go and have four
wives? And you have to look into it. So
I think a lot of the time the reason why
feminism comes first again like I was
said there shout being shouted out by
the loudest and people are not actively
doing the research. Now if people are
not actively doing the research then
it's down to us. It's down to us to tell
them that this is why this ruling is
this way. And I've done many videos
about multiple wives. I've done videos
about inheritance. I've done videos
about
>> how have they been received by like
different segments or so.
>> You get mixed mixed reviews. Right. got
I've got a short on Instagram that's
about um it's just about me saying that
oh my husband wants to have another wife
and that the amount of hate that I got
underneath that
>> but then it was like if I was
>> So you said you said that you your
husband wants to have another wife
>> it was a a
yeah it was just like a to to show that
this is it's a conversation that could
happen right I could have a conversation
with my my family member and say my
husband wants to have another wife and
if I'm okay with
>> how would you feel if your husband had
got another life.
And that's a bit of a loaded question.
That's a bit of a Maybe he's uh I mean,
is that something that you would accept?
How would you feel about it?
>> I've never been asked this before.
>> Yeah. Really? Yeah.
>> Listen, listen, listen.
>> Oh, everything is changing now, is it?
The tone has changed, has it? Go on.
>> If he could do that,
>> Yeah. Then,
you know, I I think personally for a
Muslim man in this day and age, having
one wife is enough. I would be surprised
if a Muslim man could have more than one
wife in this day and age and provide and
all of that, right? I do think it would
be difficult.
>> There is a ruling for it, but at the
time it was because, you know, the wars
and everything like that and women there
was there was more women than there was
men. So we understand why it was given
in this day and age. I think it would be
a difficult task for a man.
>> I think that polygamy has always been a
pro like it's it's always been difficult
for women. You know,
>> I mean it's natural though, right? It's
a natural instinct for a woman to be and
if and
>> I think it's even if you said to me I
wouldn't want like if you said to me I
wouldn't want my husband to get married
to another wife. Yeah. I wouldn't
consider that to be some kind of a wrong
answer, you know, like it's it's a
natural feat. If you love your husband,
why would you want to share him? It it's
sometimes if a woman says, "Okay, well
actually I want my husband to marry
another wife." If she says those words,
there's a question mark that you put on
her like, "Does she really love the guy?
Was she in the relationship for there's
actually a question mark you put on
her?"
>> Because frankly, frankly, and this is, I
think, a key and important distinction.
Yeah.
That there's a difference between hating
and ruling. Okay.
>> Yes.
as Allah says in the Quran that it's
because they have disbelieved in what
Allah has sent down. So Allah has
dullified their deeds. There's the
difference between that and there's a
difference between hating or disliking
something relating to an action that
Islam allows or forces you to do like
for
like that fighting has been prescribed
upon you and is something that is hated
towards you something that is hated
disliked. You don't like it. you don't
like to
you can hate something that's good for
you and and vice versa. M
>> but the point is is the prophet told us
that Jenna has been surrounded by things
that are disliked by people to do which
means to say that like there there's an
interesting paper actually maybe I
should say this my wife sent it to me
yeah and she actually made a good
argument you know she and um I maybe
I've never said this to her but now
she'll probably hear it right she'll
actually definitely hear it yeah and it
was a guy who used to be a lecturer of
mine when I was doing my first master's
degree. Yeah. And his name is Ysef
Raapur
and he had done this this investigation
on Hajalani
Haj was the famous and one of the most
prolific scholars of Islam. Okay. And he
wrote Fatbar which is a commentary on
Bkari. And at the time he was actually
like elite guy. He lived in Egypt at the
time funny enough. And also um he had a
wife who's a scholar. Her name was Uni.
Yeah. And so this guy Yustaf frappore
who I I used to actually be his student
at one point when I was doing my
master's degree. He had done this paper
and my wife sent it to me. She said look
because she was trying to explain to me
that you know the she was trying to
explain to me that essentially um
there's a fine line between feministic
tendencies
and psychological disposition. M
>> and but what it was is that basically
Hajani got married to another woman.
Yeah. And he didn't tell her about he
didn't tell his wife about it in the
beginning and then he told her about it.
his wife reacted in a bit of an
emotional way and she made dua you know
that her his son uh would from his son
from the second wife which was a slave
at the time or something but then he
made her into a wife that that his son
would never become which was something
that his always wanted his son to be so
it was like a dua that was particularly
painful to him and so she was trying to
show look there was no feminism at the
time
>> okay and look here's a woman reacting in
a very emotional manner to and she was a
scholar of Islam and she's you know
she's re reacting in a very emotional
manner to another scholar of Islam and
so therefore like we have to know the
difference here between and she made a
strong argument and I think that when
you look at the way that the habat and
the companion the female companions
>> how they reacted to a lot of this stuff
like threw the plate on the floor and
she smashed it because and then the
prophet said you know that your mother
has been become jealous and there's like
she she chased the prophetam outside the
house. Like if if a man gets involved in
something like this, you can't just
blame everything on feminism.
>> No, you know what I'm trying to say?
Because it's an it's an absurd case to
make that everything is feminist related
when there was no such thing as white
feminism at that particular time. So the
reason why I'm bringing this to your
attention is to show you that there is a
balance here, okay, to be made between
on the one hand ideologically being
aligned with an enemy ideology
essentially and having a normal female
reaction to something that
>> um even the companions of the prophet,
the the female companions of the
prophet, even the great scholars of
Islam, etc. Like all of them went
through that, you know what I mean? So
there's a great difference to be made
there.
>> Yeah. And I think it's also
>> if you said to me like, "Oh, you know, I
wouldn't want my husband to get married
to I wouldn't f I wouldn't judge you on
that." That's that's actually the normal
and natural thing to say.
>> Yeah. And I think that listen, if you're
having these conversations before you're
getting married, if you've had a
conversation and be like, I don't want
you to have another wife and then your
husband is going and have getting
married, then the that's, you know, a
line that's been crossed. But if you've
had if you've not had these discussions
or if you're a feminist that's not even
married, not looking for a a husband and
you're having issues with, you know,
polygyny, then you you're not even
married yet. Like what what are you
bringing these issues up for? But yeah.
Um Yes.
>> So you you made that you were saying the
reason why we derailed because you you
made a point about
>> um you've got time. Yeah.
>> Yeah. Yeah. No, I'm good for time just
now. Um, you made the point about you
said that your husband wants to take a
second wife and and you got a lot of
comments. What what were the comments
saying? What what people how were they
reacting to it?
>> Well, a lot of the comments were about,
you know, the whole prospect of polygyny
like I can't believe that your husband
is forcing you to do this and this is
disgusting that this sort of ruling. So
there was a lot of men and women and to
be honest a lot of farright Muslims that
come at you with and that's you know
they like to use these specific issues
age of Aisha polygyny things like this
>> rail people away from Islam and I mean
that that's a lot of things that a lot
of the reason why um a lot of people are
actually I mean you spoke about it
earlier a lot of farright Muslims are
there are actually a lot of anti-
farright anti-Muslims, but they're
they're actually Muslim themselves. Like
you were saying about, you know,
Somalia. I mean, recently I've seen a
lot of UEE influencers are pushing all
this far right anti- Muslims narrative
that people like Tommy Robinson are
push. And
>> yeah, a lot of these people are just
monics probably.
>> That's the thing. They're very
pro-Israel, anti-Sudan, UEE people. They
won't speak up for brothers and sisters
in Gaza, but instead they repeat this
Zionist propaganda and it's disgraceful.
It's it's they are monafics. And then
you've got even in the UK we've got
sellouts like farright types like
Benhabib and Leila Cunningham who's with
the party and it's it's actually
>> they even identify as Muslims those guys
>> well they've got Muslim names
they've got obvious even if they don't
identify as Muslims their skin color is
different right so if you're of the
color of your skin um then what do you
think's going to happen when they want
to kick the Muslims out I mean how much
of a self-hating bootlicker do you need
to be to advocate for the oppression of
fellow Muslims and people of color and
then hoping that the bigots are not
going to deport you as well when it
comes to the time to deport everyone and
just to to achieve their goal of getting
rid rid of everyone. And then
>> I mean we have people like Andrew Tate
and other reverts that are nationalists
and they align with
>> a lot of anti-Muslim farright ideology.
They push a lot of that sort of stuff
that people follow.
>> I put it down in contact with that guy,
you know.
I've heard you say I've heard you
>> I actually had a conversation with him
last two like two weeks ago or
something. I haven't refuted him
heavily. Um all my friends have but be
for one reason and one reason only.
>> Go on.
>> That I want to keep the door of
>> repentance open for the guy. Um and you
know Shaham said this to me one time he
said look um Hadad is a very esteemed
and uh excellent scholar but he said to
me one time that like you know you got
to keep the door open for some of these
guys a little bit of the time because if
you've got somebody and this is
something that I was just speaking to
the guys about because there's been a
bit of a fitna going on. And I don't
know if you've seen some of the Daer
bros are attacking each other and all
this kind of things and making
associations and letters and you know
back and forths and all this kind of
stuff.
>> May Allah guide them
>> and guide them. I agree with you. I
agree with you. That's why we need more
women in it to to set us right because
we're overly emotional. Sometimes men
can just be like, you know, ego can be
the male ego is a problem
>> as the female ego can be as well. But
you know um so a lot of it is because of
a misunderstanding of Islamic law like
in the sense that let's say like Zish I
was just saying to to Zishan Ali the
other day Zean and Ali I was saying to
them look let's say for example I do
something that's wrong Islamically yeah
is there an obligation for Zan to
correct me for Zan particularly Zean to
correct there isn't really an obligation
for him to correct me and there's not an
obligation for Ali to correct me there
may be an obligation for someone to
correct me. So someone maybe in America
or something can come out and say this
is incorrect and this you know this is
um needs to be corrected. He he said
this thing which is incorrect. Right? So
in other words
it's a it's a it's not everybody in the
community needs to refute everybody
else. So now with this whole
disassociation thing it's like people
have the um assumption that okay well he
said something wrong. all have to
disassociate with this individual. Well,
to what end? Because if we keep doing
that, there'll be nobody left. This is
exactly what the problem with uh the
matalist movement was or the tearist
movement because they kept doing that
until they had two or three different
scholars left that they said that
they're the only ones we can take
knowledge from. So
that going back to the point about
unity, you know, that's why it's
important like there for there to be
Islamic unity. But I think I derailed
you once again because you were making a
point about the the far right. Have you
received a lot of like threats and stuff
like that from the from the far right?
>> I mean, I've had videos made and people
make comments and things like that. Most
of my Islamophobia is all online than it
is, you know, face to face. I don't get
any Islamophobia face to face. Um,
but coming back to what you were saying
with Andrew and I agree with you that
yes, the door should be left open and I
have criticized him because of many
major blunders that he's made initially.
>> Speak to him personally.
>> No, I've not spoken to him personally
and I did support him initially. I did
support him when he first reverted. You
know, despite his past, everyone
deserves a second chance. Once you
become Muslim, your state is wiped
clean. I think when you align yourself
with the en enemies of Islam, it's a
major sin. And no Muslim should
contradict Islam for money or
popularity. Not that I'm saying that he
does, but that's just not something that
is
>> he does. I mean,
I mean, he does. I mean, I would agree
with you.
>> Because we have Christian, we've got
Christians like Candace Owens, Tucker
Carlson who are more fair towards
Muslims than majority of farright
Muslims. So, you know, we've got many
non-Muslims that are on our ride and
then we have on our on our side and then
we have farright Muslims that are, like
you said, embarrassing us and shaming
us. But yes, we do. We should be united
and we should stay united and, you know,
guide them too.
>> Yeah. No, no. I mean, Andrew is kind of
like a special case. He's he's on the
fringes of Islam, you know, and he
someone just needs to either robe him
back in or he needs to rope himself back
in it. So I understand all the
criticisms against him. Like I said,
I've got like this kind of personal
relationship with him. So I I'm not
refuting him because I'm trying to bring
him back in. You if I refute him, then
the doors are closed. I can't do da to
him essentially.
>> How do you think that we should respond
to other farright Muslims that are quite
aggressive and are almost refusing to
accept that they are Muslim or the skin
color? How do you think that we should
respond?
>> Which ones?
Well, we have like people like Ben Habib
and Leila Cunningham and
>> I didn't I thought they were the to be
honest. I never Yeah, but I agree with
the sentiment. But it's just it goes
back to the principle that if someone is
doing it, I don't need to. Or that there
should be some people that are doing it
that other people don't need to do it.
>> So it's if Zan's refuting Andrew Tate on
his points,
>> then I don't need to refute Andrew Tate.
Or if Ali is refuting Andrew Tate, then
I don't need to. Actually, there's no uh
wj on me. there's no obligation on me to
do so if I feel like this
>> happen people like Men Gains obviously
as well.
>> Yeah. Same thing with him. So if if I
can have a conversation I can have a
personal relationship with him where I
can try and bring him to Islam using a
soft approach and then let's say Zan
decides no I'm going to go and publicly
refute him then both of those things can
work in unison with each other.
>> But it's it's about access. So like for
example, if I if I didn't have access to
Andrew or Myron or or whoever it may be
>> and Yeah. I might I might feel like it's
actually more advantageous now.
>> Like the same thing, there's a sister
that her name is Lily or something like
that. She's coming out. Yeah.
>> Yeah.
>> And I actually feel sorry for her
because like she's doing a good job
>> in dawa. She's bringing a lot of people
into Islam and whatever. And then
there's some people saying, "Oh, you
know, she needs to put on the hijab or
she needs to do this, that, and the
other."
Okay, that's true that she needs to do
all of that, but she's just new to
Islam.
>> Mhm.
>> You know, and she's performing million
times better with all due respect to
Andrew than Andrew Tate was.
>> And she, you know, Andrew Tate was had
the uh what do you call it? He had the
fame already coming into Islam and he
and he, you know, he was on the
speedboat with whatever he was on the
speed boatat with. You know, that's a
different story. But you know this
sister like she's coming to Islam and
now she's bringing a lot of people.
She's actually doing da. Yeah. And I
feel kind of sorry for her because you
know I've seen people abuse the sister
on Twitter like you know attack her and
this and that and um I know she's also
married. She's got a husband that is you
know helping her and supporting her and
stuff like that. But the the fact is
that
it's not the right way of dealing with
it. So if everybody came and said,
"Okay, well she's not wearing a hijab.
Therefore, all of us need to come out
and attack her on that point."
>> Okay. So then what does it do for the
future of Islam?
>> Like it gives nobody a chance to
develop. In fact, someone will say,
"Okay, what's the evidence of what
you're saying?"
>> Mhm.
>> The evidence is actually Ibent Tamir
wrote a nice and it's interesting it's
come from Ibamia, right? Because Ib is a
person the hamies respect um the mab
people respect and and also the salaf is
respect every like kind of respects his
knowledge. He wrote um a small book
called
yeah
and in that book he basically said if
you've got a new Muslim coming into
Islam
you shouldn't tell them about certain
rulings. M
>> it's not just that you he he said
there's certain rulings I can't remember
the rulings that he gave like certain
things that are considered to be haram.
He said you shouldn't even mention it to
them. It's can can be blameworthy for
you to mention it to them because you
need to build these people up step by
step.
>> So like the thing about social media is
that you've got people on the precipice
of Islam, people that are right on the
fringes of it that still identify with
Muslim character
>> and there needs to be kind of like a
double approach with them. It's the same
thing with the Muslim feminists, right?
There needs to be a double approach.
There needs somebody needs to refute
them at one point and say, "Look, what
you believe is not acceptable, but some
other people need to kind of rope them
in and and speak to them in a
compassionate way and and and and try
and win them over in a sense." And it's
I think the ying and the yang, the the
hot and the cold, both approaches are
probably the best way to go with these
things. And it is done strategically.
Like I have to be honest with with you
and say that. Like for example, even
with someone like Jordan Peterson, now
he's a Zionist. I mean, the guys, he's
gone off the rails. But is it okay,
he was given da, he was still given da.
Is is that does that mean the doors of
da are closed? My position is the doors
of da on a personal level are never
closed. There should be someone doing da
especially to influential people. There
should be like if there's access point,
there should be one person just speaking
to them in a neutral fashion. Yeah, you
can tell them I don't agree with your
position here. You're you're completely
out of order here. You're you're
genocizable. You can tell that. But at
the same time,
>> the objective is always to try and bring
people to Islam and to try and bring
people to guidance. So, I agree with
your sentiment though, like with all
these farright kind of Muslims and the
ones who associate with them and all
that kind of thing.
>> And I think it's a real problem, you
know. Um, is there anything else you
wanted to mention before we because I
know that you've got the duties that
>> Yes. Um, no, I just wanted to say what
the point that you were making about,
you know, Lily, Lily J and people saying
to about hijab and even just Muslim
feminists in general. I'll be honest,
right, if a man was to come to me and I
do get men that come to me and say, you
know, your nagab is, you're showing too
much or I Yeah, I used that you're
showing too much or your wrist is
showing or whatever, right? And it's a
matter of difference of opinion.
>> Also, you're not my brother, you're not
my dad, you're not my husband, you're no
relation to me whatsoever. Who are you
to tell me? I have a husband. I have a
dad who can tell me this.
>> Exactly. Yeah.
>> If a woman comes to me and says,
"Sister, listen. I think you know your
wrist is showing too much." Or you
people sisters that go to Lily J like
>> she can't even in my opinion even if a
woman does that it's wrong because
these are issues that there's difference
like the facial thing is that there's a
whole difference of opinion on that. You
can't go and blame somebody for an issue
with difference because if we start
doing that then it's like okay well you
should be wearing leather socks, you
should be wearing this socks. You should
be the you have to have the beard this
long. It's it's going to it's it's crazy
so much more division than anything
else. So
>> yeah.
>> But yeah, I get your point. I mean it's
was that's part of the reason why a lot
of women feel frustrated actually
because there's I have to say this. I do
believe this actually. Yeah.
I think that
there is an overemphasis on female
appearance and there traditionally and I
think that's I'm not saying that's not
um there isn't like guidelines in Islam.
There are guid of course there's
guidelines in Islam. Yeah.
>> But I think that though in a lot of our
cultures our Islamic cultures there's
been like an overemphasis on it. Okay.
So if we take the hadith
as a Hassan hadith like some scholars of
hadith and stuff have made a Hassan.
Okay. Which says that when the prophet
wasallam saw Bakar the the daughter of
Bakar, she wasn't wearing hijab. Now a
lot of them say it's a D hadith, but he
saw her like without hijab. Yeah.
>> And he and all he said in the most
neutral tone possible was that Allah
commanded you to cover everything except
for the hands and the face. Now
obviously the people who say in they
consider that hadith to be weak and it's
not to be taken or whatever. But if we
take that hadith as a as a kind of
interesting point to note. Yeah. Then
clearly the prophet sallallam was
speaking in a way which was there's no
emotion attached to it. He wasn't he
create there was never a sermon recorded
of the prophetam standing and talking
about uh oh the woman and this and that.
Someone could argue well it was it
didn't exist at the time but that's not
true because there's many narrations
saying that there were there were lots
of them that were and actually not just
that and this is going to sound
controversial but I'm going to say
anyway cuz why not one second maybe
maybe this is a sign
this is a sign but okay like for example
there were like right hand possessed
there were there were people that they
were not obliged to wear hijab And they
were still like there were Muslims that
were Muslim women at a time at the time
of the prophet who are not obliged to
wear hijab to a point where actually
disallowed them to I mean that's a bit
of a controversial thing to wear hijab.
So the issue I'm not trying to say
therefore like let's trivialize hijab
you know my name is my surname is hijab
so I wouldn't go that far but what I'm
saying is that there's been a
disproportionate emphasis in a lot of
the cultures about how women like kind
of behave or they dress and stuff like
that compared to what they actually
believe and and these kinds of things.
So I would say that that can sometimes
create more frustration among some
segments of society and they just feel
like okay well if if these guys are
going to judge me like this then it may
make them feel like okay well whatever
I'm going to go to the leftwing people
here they're less judgmental they may
feel like more at home cuz left-wing
people are actually very welcoming
people
>> like genu I've never really received
from like a proper lefty real disrespect
like here and there sometimes maybe if
they're drunk or something but generally
Generally speaking, they really respect
they're open. Their whole ideology is to
try and include you and to try and not
be racist and not be discriminatory and
prejudicial. Um, and so if like, okay,
you've got this angry father, this angry
brother like telling you what to wear
and then you got and then this same
woman that's going to the university and
you know this gay man is just telling
her how, you know, she doesn't have to
worry about anything or this other woman
over here, this feminist woman is, you
know, open arms and stuff like that.
That could cause a psychological
aversion to conservatism, religious
conservatism.
>> Yeah. Because and it leads to where
where does that lead? Right. No hijab.
Okay. Well, then I'll start wearing
loads of makeup. Okay. I'll start
dressing a certain way. Okay. I'll start
going out drinking. Okay. I'll start
going to you know, it leads it leads
down a path, right? Because like you
said, what becomes more appealing? The
people that are oppressing you in the
house or the people that are telling you
to be free outside?
>> Um so yeah, I agree. There is one thing
that I wanted to ask you about and this
we were talking about unity and Muslims
and there seems to be a lot of talk as
well about you know this whole Israel
Iran and as a Sunni Muslim I'm not
particularly pro Iran because of the
history of oppression of Sunnis by Shia
which has been brutal to say the least.
So what is your stance on you know
supporting Iran and defeating Israel who
I believe is a greater evil and I think
that if Iran can you know be a bully
like Israel then that's a much bigger
threat to us and to other Muslims but
what is your stance on the whole Iran
and Israel?
>> I think you said it in a good way. I
think my stance and your stance are
probably identical in the sense that we
might not agree with Iran or the regime
and we might actually even say that
they've committed genocides in Syria and
they've done lots of horrible things and
um actually they probably contributed to
apostasy in their own country to at a
rate that has probably never precedented
in Islamic history. Like I I think that
if some and there have been studies done
in Iran by the way that show how many
people no longer associate with Islam. M
>> so the that leadership needs to take
stock of his actions and see what what
we're doing like that are making these
people hate us like this like our
populist if they don't do that then I
think then um there's no introspection
from their side. Yeah. But at the same
time I mean it's it's doesn't take a
genius to realize that if it's a matter
of is it Iran or Israel there's no
question who we support in that you know
there's no question it's oh someone says
I support Israel over Iran then I doubt
their credibility as a Muslim. That's
how bad it is because anyone who says
that they support Israel in any capacity
like we were just talking about those
tribal is Somali landers that are an
embarrassment one one of the worst
embarrassments to the ummah for 1,400
years uh because of their tribal
allegiance. The same thing applies to
these um these people here. So I think
that to answer your question there's no
problem with this. There's no problem in
saying that, okay, well, if it was a
matter of Syria, the Syrian people or
the Iranian regime, then obviously we
choose the Syrian people and we we
condemn it. But if it's a matter of the
is like Israelis getting taught a lesson
or something by Iran and we understand
the geopolitics of if Iran falls then it
can create a bigger problem for the
Palestinians, it can create a bigger
problem for the Yemenes, it that's a
different argument altogether and it's a
sensical argument. So there's a way of
being balanced about this and um I think
a lot of people are not balanced when it
comes to speaking about this. They speak
in a way that's embarrassing to the um
actually on both sides. There are some
people that kind of like sympathize
overly with with Iran and as if they're
the bastions and the heroes of the um
and stuff like that. They're not even
the heroes of their own people frankly.
Right.
>> Yeah.
>> And u but then there are other people
who who look at Iran and they say well
actually even if Iran like defeats
Israel in the war there's no praise to
be given. and there's no concession to
be made and that's another extreme in my
my estimation and someone will say well
how can you some take fear of the the
Iranian population and not the ones who
consider themselves themselves to be
non-Muslim but because they're 12 Shi
and that's not the opinion of the
majority the the overwhelming vast
majority of Sunni Muslims that's not the
opinion of Imitamia he knew what the 12s
were he wrote a whole book about Shiism
called Minhajnah
that's not the opinion of almost any of
the scholars of former Madabs I mean
that the 12 is the amii the lei the
leoty are non-Muslims so so there are
some stances people take with Iran and
Iran's actually a really beautiful
country it's probably one of the most
beautiful countries the culture the food
the people they have great honor
actually despite the fact there's rising
apostasy but they have an honor culture
they you they're hospitable people
they're respectful people I've met many
Iranians in my life and stuff and I've
I've always had a good experience
speaking to them and being with them Um,
and they're all trustworthy. A lot of
them are trustworthy and they have that.
So, there are extremes people take with
the people themselves. And there's
there's racism in Iran to Arabs in
particular. That's very well known.
>> But there's also racism in the reverse.
There's a lot of Arab racism towards
Iran. There's a lot of non Iranian or
Persian racism towards Iranian people.
But, um, I I think that there's a
balance to be had and you can't discount
or negate Iran. it's too big and too
strong and it's too important a Muslim
country in in too important a
geopolitical location for it to be
negated or rejected. You know, you have
to just be nuanced in the way that you
that you discuss the issue. And I think
a lot of people have lost that with with
Iran. Yeah, I do get a lot of push back
from my position, from my followers, you
know, that are vent very very anti-Shia
and like you said, it is it's not just
embarrassing, but it's silly to have
this view of what is the greater evil.
And then obviously, we're seeing a lot
of Israeli propaganda coming out about
trying to rescue the Iranian people and
free Muslim women from dressing
modestly. all these videos that are
coming out now from years ago um or you
know from different countries that
Muslim women are now being oppressed in
Iran and they need to be saved. Um but I
think that like you said you know we've
seen what they're doing in Venezuela,
we've seen what's going to be happening
in Argentina with the forest fires. So
if Iran can stop um any more wars then
I'm all for that as well.
>> Yeah. And it doesn't mean that we have
to like if it was a non-Muslim country,
I don't think that the irony is I think
if it was a non-Muslim country, even if
that non-Muslim country has had a
negative colonial past
>> with the Muslim world, I think it would
not have that much controversy. So, for
example, if France, I mean, as an
example, if they decided, look at Spain.
I mean, actually, we don't need to do
this as a hypothetical because Spain is
a country that's had a very negative
colonial past with the Muslim world.
It's as well as the non-Muslim world.
the the colonialism of the Latin America
is one of the worst um events in human
history in terms of death toll. Right?
>> Spain is kind of pro Palestine and it's
being praised by Muslim people. Okay. So
if you can Okay, if you're going to
invoke a historical argument, okay, oh
Iran is so bad because it's history of
the Safowits, okay, and all that. Okay,
then what have you said about Spain? I
mean, Spain is a country that's had a
colonial past. is gone into Morocco, you
know, is is the Spanish Inquisition was
one of the worst events, you know, in in
1492 in in in in history actually of of
against Muslims. But yet, you have no
problem praising Spain
>> if it's as a a mildly pro Palestine
stance,
>> but then you you invoke a historical
argumentation when it comes to Iran.
>> That doesn't make sense to me. Someone
could say and say argue and say, "Well,
Spain hasn't been involved in any recent
wars against Muslims, whereas Iran has."
Okay. Well, I I make the same argument.
If the United Kingdom, who has just been
in Iraq and Afghanistan, decided to take
a pro Palestine stance, I personally
believe that it would be praised among
the Muslim population. Okay? Even though
they killed a million people in there.
So, it's it's a bit of a historians call
it the narcissism of small difference,
okay? which is that sometimes when
you're closer to a group, I mean, if you
compare the 12s with the Zionists,
there's nobody's going to say we're
closer to except for a freak, uh, you
know, except for somebody who's um, you
know, is inept or ridiculous or who
who's been indoctrinated themselves. No
one's going to say we're closer to um,
the Zionist than we are to the what do
you call it, the uh, the the the the
Iranian 12vers. Yeah.
>> Yeah.
So if if we take that point and say well
actually in that case all right if the
UK took a prop palestine stance okay
Muslims would celebrate it they would
acknowledge it they would probably
praise it and they would give concession
to the United Kingdom for that reason
>> so I think the and once again people are
not making a distinction between the
Iranian populace and the Iranian
government. Yeah.
>> And and these distinctions all need to
be made. And
>> and for all of the apostasy that's
happening in Iran, there's still a pro
Palestine sentiment.
>> So if you ask even the apostates in
Iran, what do you think of Israel? They
they'll have a negative view on Israel,
you know.
>> So I think all of that needs to be kind
of thought about. Uh what's what's new
for you? What's next for you? Uh your
your tell us about your your channel and
stuff. I know you need to go and do some
stuff. I don't want to take too much of
your time. So before we uh depart, tell
us more about your channel, what you're
planning to do in the future, what's
happening for 2026, 27. Um if this
conversation is going to spark anything
new, if there's going to be like, you
know, I'm going to see popping up on
TikTok, you know,
>> going for it.
>> Yeah. So, alhamdulillah, I mean, mah, we
were just blessed with a baby ghetto at
3 weeks ago, so that is like taking up a
lot of my time. Um I say we I because I
did all of the work. So I was blessed
with a baby. Say that again. So what
>> I was blessed we had a baby girl three
weeks ago. So
>> Oh, is it? Congratulations. Yeah, I know
how that is. That's very difficult.
>> Yeah. Um yeah. So we've got three
ghettos now. So that is like taking up
all of January. Um but alhamdulillah in
the future I mean obviously Israel and
Palestine is the forefront of of my sort
of view and what I want to do. that's
not something I can do myself. Um but
and then hopefully inshallah we can
start talking more about things like
Muslim feminism. We can talk more about
parenting. We can talk more about um one
thing that I do want to start talking
about is our children. Um and I want to
start talking about that. And then
obviously all the geopolitical stuff. I
think the stand the way that the the
channel is going is going well. And I'm
hoping this year we could start doing a
little bit more in terms of, you know,
going out and doing live shows and
things like that. There were a few
things that came up at the end of last
year that I couldn't commit to because
of the baby being born. So, inshallah,
in the new year, I can maybe get out
into the world and um maybe start doing
things live. That would be good as well.
But um yeah, alhamdulillah, it's going
well. And I've never really had a plan
for this channel. Allah has always
guided me. So, may Allah continue to
guide me and Hopefully it stays up and
doesn't get banned.
>> Inshallah will stay up and your voice is
a very very important one.
>> Um a important female one. We hope that
you can reproduce that. Obviously you've
reproduced quite literally recently, but
we could produce it in a metaphoric
sense as well and create lots of other
voices like yours
>> um that will also have a very similar
balance kind of conservative message
uncompromising but also
>> you come across as very approachable. So
I you know um I hope that
>> that will get through to more people
like my daughters and your daughters
>> um and and even my sons and your sons
inshallah as well in the future.
>> So that's uh that's something that we
hope for and we
>> um want to thank you as well for your
for your sometimes taking a lot of slack
and and getting attacked because of
defending us. I've seen some of those
videos and stuff and and people have
mentioned you a lot in the in the
comment section and sent me some stuff
about doing this podcast with you. So,
I'm very grateful that you've given us
the time and um inshallah we'll do it
again maybe on your channel this time.
>> Yeah, inshallah. I mean, yeah, anytime.
You're welcome. Um I do appreciate all
the work that you guys do as well and um
always getting in touch and yeah and
like I said, it's all about unity,
right? We all have to stay united and if
we feel like we're doing wrong, we call
each other out behind the scenes, but
there's no need. we're all in the same
team and we're all wanting the same
thing in
>> I think that's well I know it's a simple
message but I think it's a really really
important one and um Muslim men Muslim
women young old every age we come
together realize the bigger picture
unify the Muslims get strength so that
we can prevent genocides that we can be
strong and that we can help each other
or be very happy
>> yeah inshallah and if there's anything
more that you need from me please let me
know get in touch um like you said me or
my husband as
He's very approachable.
>> I've been in contact with your husband.
So in Yeah. Anything I'll just message
your husband. No, it's perfect. No, not
at all. With that, we will conclude.
Okay. Your brothers and sisters in Islam
net from Norway are establishing a
masid, a da center. This center, this
masid, this educational institution will
act like a beacon of light calling the
Muslims in Norway back to the essence of
Islam. So give generously and Allahel
will give you even more.